README.md, before:

# SQL Alchemy Challenge - SurfsUp  
`Module 10`  
`EdX(2U) & UT Data Analytics and Visualization Bootcamp`  
`Cohort UTA-VIRT-DATA-PT-11-2024-U-LOLC`  
`By Neel Kumar Agarwal`  

## Table of Contents  
1. [Introduction](#introduction)  
2. [Setup & Usage](#setup--usage)  
    - [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
    - [Instructions](#instructions)  
    - [Directory Structure](#directory-structure)  
3. [Challenge Overview](#challenge-overview)  
    - [Part 1](#part-1-analyzeexplore-data)  
    - [Part 2](#part-2-design-climate-app)  
4. [Queries](#queries)  
    - [Static](#static)  
        + [Precipitation (Inches)](#precipitation-inches---most-recent-year)
        + [All Stations](#all-observing-stations-with-station-info)
        + [Temperature Data (Most Active Station)](#temperature-data---most-recent-yearactive-station)
    - [Dynamic](#dynamic)  
        + [Temperature Data (Single Parameter)](#temperature-data---single-param)
        + [Temperature Data (Dual Parameter)](#temperature-data---dual-param)

> [!NOTE]  
> All roleplaying instructions, rubric requirements, and Starter Code (with  
> database and csv's) are provided by 2U/edX as part of their educational  
> package provided with paid entry into the class.  


## Introduction  
Congratulations to me! I've decided to treat myself to a long holiday vacation in Honolulu, Hawaii. To help with my trip planning, I'm going to do a climate analysis about the area.  
In order to do so, I'll first use Jupyter Notebooks to write/run code in isolated code blocks so that I can experiment with my `SQL Alchemy` abstraction layer and ensure that I perform my queries correctly. I'll also do some basic analysis by using `Pandas` and `Matplotlib` to get a better grasp on my data and and provide a visual aid. Jupyter Notebook is excellent for testing purposes as it allows for easy running and printing of code blocks. This also means that after I ensure it's veracity, I can copy and paste desired queries inside of a regular python (.py) file to run as an executable!  
That serves the purposes of this project very well, as after I finish exploring and doing my analysis of Hawaii's climate data I can create an application in a python file using `Flask` and `SQL Alchemy` to create APIs! `Flask` will allow for the exportation of python functions into specific webpage softlink routes, which can be filled with `SQL` queries performed with `SQL Alchemy`, as well as `HTML` and `CSS` code for any explanation or styling. Now I'm prepared for my vacation!  



## Setup & Usage  


### Prerequisites  
Python 3.x  
   - Standard libraries: `datetime` (included with Python)  
   - Non-standard library: `pandas`, `numpy`, `matplotlib`, `sqlalchemy`, and `Flask`  
   - IDE that supports Jupyter Notebooks with Python  
   - DBMS: **SQLite 3.49.0**  by way of --> **SQL Alchemy**  

[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  


### Instructions  

1. Clone this repository and open it on your local device.  
2. For `climate_analysis.ipynb` (Part 1):  
    - Open `climate_analysis.ipynb` in your IDE and run all cells.  
    - (Better viewing experience by using the 'Outline' tab in VSCode)  
    - If the necessary dependencies aren't found, please install using one of the following methods (however pip is preferred):  
        - `pip install <missing_library>`  
        - `conda install <missing_library>` (use the channel of your choice if multiple are found)  
3. For `app.py` (Part 2):  
    - Open `app.py` using an integrated terminal and run using your python compiler (Version 3.x)  
    - By use of `Flask` a local only webpage will be instantiated on a server on your computer  
    - Perform any of the listed API calls using the webpage directly or by using a `requests.get()` method in python (as well in other languages that offer API extensions).  
4. Enjoy!  

[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  



### Directory Structure  
```bash  
sqlalchemy-challenge/  
|  
|—- SurfsUp/  
|   |—- Resources/  
|   |   —- hawaii_measurements.csv  
|   |   -- hawaii_stations.csv  
|   |   -- hawaii.sqlite  
|   |  
|   |—- app.py  
|   |-- climate_analysis.ipynb  
```  
This structure ensures all inputs are organized within their respective folders.  

[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  



## Challenge Overview  
The real purpose of this assignment is to explore using these technologies and methods in conjunction with each other, but within the scope of the project the purpose is the creation of multiple APIs that allow for calling to retrieve live JSON representation of queried data.  


### Part 1: Analyze/Explore Data  
First off, I'll need to use Python and SQLAlchemy to do a basic climate analysis and data exploration of my climate database. Specifically, I'll use SQLAlchemy's ORM to perform queries, Pandas for easy manipulation, and Matplotlib for visualization.  
The following list outlines steps taken to perform exploration and analysis:  

1. Use SQLAlchemy method create_engine() to connect to the SQLite database.  
2. Use SQLAlchemy method automap_base() to reflect tables into classes and save references to the classes.  
3. Link Python to the database by creating SQLAlchemy sessions.  
4. Perform a precipitation analysis and station analysis...  

[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  


### Part 2: Design Climate App  
The second part of this project is to create a functioning webpage based API that can be called  
like a normal API. This part actually combines the use of general use Python, SQL Alchemy, HTML, and CSS  
to create retrievable JSON objects. The following are the Flask App routes that will be created.  

1. **Route: /**  
    - Create a Homepage at the base route.  
2. **Route: /api/v1.0/precipitation**  
    - Convert the query results from the precipitation analysis to a dictionary using the date and precipitation as key: value pairs and returns the JSON.  
3. **Route: /api/v1.0/stations**  
    - Returns JSON of stations from the dataset.  
4. **Route: /api/v1.0/tobs**  
    - Queries dates/temperatures for the most active station of the prior year and returns the JSON.  
5. **Route: /api/v1.0/&lt;start&gt;**  
    - Returns JSON of temperature minimum, average, and maximum for a given starting date, which will end at the end of the database.  
6. **Route: /api/v1.0/&lt;start&gt;/&lt;end&gt;**  
    - Returns JSON of temperature minimum, average, and maximum for a given starting and ending date.  

[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  


## Queries  
Query results will return with nested metadata separately from query results within the same JSON object. The `json_setup()` function is made to setup the dictionary with one line of code, giving them all similar structures.  

### Static  
#### Precipitation (Inches) - Most recent year  
```python  
def precipitation_query():
    '''Query for precipitation scores for last year of db'''
    last_date = app.config['DELTA_YEAR']
    sel = [
        measurement.date
        ,measurement.prcp
    ]
    with Session() as session: # Precipitation Scores
        data = session.query(*sel
            ).filter(measurement.date >= last_date
            ).all()
    data_nest = []
    for date, prcp in data:
        data_nest.append({date: prcp})
    json_ready = json_setup(
        route_prcp
        ,data_nest
        ,desc = 'Precipitation scores for last year of data.'
    )
    return jsonify(json_ready)
```  
[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  


#### All observing Stations (with station info)  
```python  
def stations_query():
    '''Query for full list of stations'''
    sel = [
        station.station
        ,station.name
        ,station.latitude
        ,station.longitude
        ,station.elevation
    ]
    with Session() as session:
        data = session.query(*sel).all()
    data_nest = []
    for id, name, latitude, longitude, elevation in data:
        data_dict = {}
        data_dict['id'] = id
        data_dict['name'] = name
        data_dict['lat'] = latitude
        data_dict['lng'] = longitude
        data_dict['elevation'] = elevation
        data_nest.append(data_dict)
    json_ready = json_setup(
        route_stations
        ,data_nest
        ,desc = 'Full list of observation stations.'
    )
    return jsonify(json_ready)
```  
[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  


#### Temperature data - Most Recent Year/Active Station  
```python  
def tobs_query():
    '''Query for last year of temp data for most active station'''
    last_date = app.config['DELTA_YEAR']
    station_count = func.count(measurement.station)
    sel = [
        measurement.station
        ,station_count
    ]
    with Session() as session:
        data = session.query(*sel
            ).group_by(measurement.station
            ).order_by(station_count.desc()
            ).first()
    most_active = data[0]
    sel = [
        measurement.date
        ,measurement.tobs
    ]
    with Session() as session:
        data = session.query(*sel
            ).filter(measurement.station == most_active
            ).filter(measurement.date >= last_date
            ).all()
    data_nest = []
    for date, tobs in data:
        data_dict = {}
        data_dict['date'] = date
        data_dict['tobs'] = tobs
        data_nest.append(data_dict)
    json_ready = json_setup(
        route_tobs
        ,data_nest
        ,desc = 'Last year of temperature data for most active station.'
    )
    return jsonify(json_ready)
```  
[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  


### Dynamic  
The following script the function shared between the two dynamic calls allowed for this API.  

```python  
def temp_byDate(start = None, end = None):
    sel = [
        func.min(measurement.tobs)
        ,func.avg(measurement.tobs)
        ,func.max(measurement.tobs)
    ]
    if start and (not end):
        with Session() as session:
            data = session.query(*sel
                ).filter(measurement.date >= start)
    elif start and end:
        with Session() as session:
            data = session.query(*sel
                ).filter(measurement.date >= start
                ).filter(measurement.date <= end)
    else:
        print('Sorry, this API call is not supported yet. ERROR 404')
        abort(404)
    data = data.first()
    data_nest = {
        'TMIN': data[0]
        ,'TAVG': data[1]
        ,'TMAX': data[2]
    }
    return data_nest
```  
[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  


#### Temperature data - Single Param  
```python  
def temp_filter_single(start):
    data_nest = temp_byDate(start)
    json_ready = json_setup(
        route_start
        ,data_nest
        ,desc = 'Basic temperature stats (min, avg, max) for a specified starting date, ends at most recent date.'
        ,params = {'start_date': start, 'end_date': None}
    )
    return jsonify(json_ready)
```  
[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  


#### Temperature data - Dual Param  
```python  
def temp_filter_double(start, end):
    data_nest = temp_byDate(start, end)
    json_ready = json_setup(
        route_end
        ,data_nest
        ,desc = 'Basic temperature stats (min, avg, max) for a specified start and end date.'
        ,params = {'start_date': start, 'end_date': end}
    )
    return jsonify(json_ready)
```  
[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)

Commit message:

Update README.md to clarify query execution methodology and session management practices

README.md, after:

# SQL Alchemy Challenge - SurfsUp  
`Module 10`  
`EdX(2U) & UT Data Analytics and Visualization Bootcamp`  
`Cohort UTA-VIRT-DATA-PT-11-2024-U-LOLC`  
`By Neel Kumar Agarwal`  

## Table of Contents  
1. [Introduction](#introduction)  
2. [Setup & Usage](#setup--usage)  
    - [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
    - [Instructions](#instructions)  
    - [Directory Structure](#directory-structure)  
3. [Challenge Overview](#challenge-overview)  
    - [Part 1](#part-1-analyzeexplore-data)  
    - [Part 2](#part-2-design-climate-app)  
4. [Queries](#queries)  
    - [Static](#static)  
        + [Precipitation (Inches)](#precipitation-inches---most-recent-year)
        + [All Stations](#all-observing-stations-with-station-info)
        + [Temperature Data (Most Active Station)](#temperature-data---most-recent-yearactive-station)
    - [Dynamic](#dynamic)  
        + [Temperature Data (Single Parameter)](#temperature-data---single-param)
        + [Temperature Data (Dual Parameter)](#temperature-data---dual-param)

> [!NOTE]  
> All roleplaying instructions, rubric requirements, and Starter Code (with  
> database and csv's) are provided by 2U/edX as part of their educational  
> package provided with paid entry into the class.  


## Introduction  
Congratulations to me! I've decided to treat myself to a long holiday vacation in Honolulu, Hawaii. To help with my trip planning, I'm going to do a climate analysis about the area.  
In order to do so, I'll first use Jupyter Notebooks to write/run code in isolated code blocks so that I can experiment with my `SQL Alchemy` abstraction layer and ensure that I perform my queries correctly. I'll also do some basic analysis by using `Pandas` and `Matplotlib` to get a better grasp on my data and and provide a visual aid. Jupyter Notebook is excellent for testing purposes as it allows for easy running and printing of code blocks. This also means that after I ensure it's veracity, I can copy and paste desired queries inside of a regular python (.py) file to run as an executable!  
That serves the purposes of this project very well, as after I finish exploring and doing my analysis of Hawaii's climate data I can create an application in a python file using `Flask` and `SQL Alchemy` to create APIs! `Flask` will allow for the exportation of python functions into specific webpage softlink routes, which can be filled with `SQL` queries performed with `SQL Alchemy`, as well as `HTML` and `CSS` code for any explanation or styling. Now I'm prepared for my vacation!  



## Setup & Usage  


### Prerequisites  
Python 3.x  
   - Standard libraries: `datetime` (included with Python)  
   - Non-standard library: `pandas`, `numpy`, `matplotlib`, `sqlalchemy`, and `Flask`  
   - IDE that supports Jupyter Notebooks with Python  
   - DBMS: **SQLite 3.49.0**  by way of --> **SQL Alchemy**  

[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  


### Instructions  

1. Clone this repository and open it on your local device.  
2. For `climate_analysis.ipynb` (Part 1):  
    - Open `climate_analysis.ipynb` in your IDE and run all cells.  
    - (Better viewing experience by using the 'Outline' tab in VSCode)  
    - If the necessary dependencies aren't found, please install using one of the following methods (however pip is preferred):  
        - `pip install <missing_library>`  
        - `conda install <missing_library>` (use the channel of your choice if multiple are found)  
3. For `app.py` (Part 2):  
    - Open `app.py` using an integrated terminal and run using your python compiler (Version 3.x)  
    - By use of `Flask` a local only webpage will be instantiated on a server on your computer  
    - Perform any of the listed API calls using the webpage directly or by using a `requests.get()` method in python (as well in other languages that offer API extensions).  
4. Enjoy!  

[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  



### Directory Structure  
```bash  
sqlalchemy-challenge/  
|  
|—- SurfsUp/  
|   |—- Resources/  
|   |   —- hawaii_measurements.csv  
|   |   -- hawaii_stations.csv  
|   |   -- hawaii.sqlite  
|   |  
|   |—- app.py  
|   |-- climate_analysis.ipynb  
```  
This structure ensures all inputs are organized within their respective folders.  

[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  



## Challenge Overview  
The real purpose of this assignment is to explore using these technologies and methods in conjunction with each other, but within the scope of the project the purpose is the creation of multiple APIs that allow for calling to retrieve live JSON representation of queried data.  
Queries were performed differently than how they were likely expected, using a `sessionmaker()` binding to the engine and `with as` to create short-scoped session context managers through the application to open and close sessions as quickly as possible. They are personally preferred here as closing sessions throughout the experimentation of the Jupyter Notebook is easy to forget with isolated cell block styling.  


### Part 1: Analyze/Explore Data  
First off, I'll need to use Python and SQLAlchemy to do a basic climate analysis and data exploration of my climate database. Specifically, I'll use SQLAlchemy's ORM to perform queries, Pandas for easy manipulation, and Matplotlib for visualization.  
The following list outlines steps taken to perform exploration and analysis:  

1. Use SQLAlchemy method create_engine() to connect to the SQLite database.  
2. Use SQLAlchemy method automap_base() to reflect tables into classes and save references to the classes.  
3. Link Python to the database by creating SQLAlchemy sessions.  
4. Perform a precipitation analysis and station analysis...  

[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  


### Part 2: Design Climate App  
The second part of this project is to create a functioning webpage based API that can be called  
like a normal API. This part actually combines the use of general use Python, SQL Alchemy, HTML, and CSS  
to create retrievable JSON objects. The following are the Flask App routes that will be created.  

1. **Route: /**  
    - Create a Homepage at the base route.  
2. **Route: /api/v1.0/precipitation**  
    - Convert the query results from the precipitation analysis to a dictionary using the date and precipitation as key: value pairs and returns the JSON.  
3. **Route: /api/v1.0/stations**  
    - Returns JSON of stations from the dataset.  
4. **Route: /api/v1.0/tobs**  
    - Queries dates/temperatures for the most active station of the prior year and returns the JSON.  
5. **Route: /api/v1.0/&lt;start&gt;**  
    - Returns JSON of temperature minimum, average, and maximum for a given starting date, which will end at the end of the database.  
6. **Route: /api/v1.0/&lt;start&gt;/&lt;end&gt;**  
    - Returns JSON of temperature minimum, average, and maximum for a given starting and ending date.  

[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  


## Queries  
Query results will return with nested metadata separately from query results within the same JSON object. The `json_setup()` function is made to setup the dictionary with one line of code, giving them all similar structures.  

### Static  
#### Precipitation (Inches) - Most recent year  
```python  
def precipitation_query():
    '''Query for precipitation scores for last year of db'''
    last_date = app.config['DELTA_YEAR']
    sel = [
        measurement.date
        ,measurement.prcp
    ]
    with Session() as session: # Precipitation Scores
        data = session.query(*sel
            ).filter(measurement.date >= last_date
            ).all()
    data_nest = []
    for date, prcp in data:
        data_nest.append({date: prcp})
    json_ready = json_setup(
        route_prcp
        ,data_nest
        ,desc = 'Precipitation scores for last year of data.'
    )
    return jsonify(json_ready)
```  
[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  


#### All observing Stations (with station info)  
```python  
def stations_query():
    '''Query for full list of stations'''
    sel = [
        station.station
        ,station.name
        ,station.latitude
        ,station.longitude
        ,station.elevation
    ]
    with Session() as session:
        data = session.query(*sel).all()
    data_nest = []
    for id, name, latitude, longitude, elevation in data:
        data_dict = {}
        data_dict['id'] = id
        data_dict['name'] = name
        data_dict['lat'] = latitude
        data_dict['lng'] = longitude
        data_dict['elevation'] = elevation
        data_nest.append(data_dict)
    json_ready = json_setup(
        route_stations
        ,data_nest
        ,desc = 'Full list of observation stations.'
    )
    return jsonify(json_ready)
```  
[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  


#### Temperature data - Most Recent Year/Active Station  
```python  
def tobs_query():
    '''Query for last year of temp data for most active station'''
    last_date = app.config['DELTA_YEAR']
    station_count = func.count(measurement.station)
    sel = [
        measurement.station
        ,station_count
    ]
    with Session() as session:
        data = session.query(*sel
            ).group_by(measurement.station
            ).order_by(station_count.desc()
            ).first()
    most_active = data[0]
    sel = [
        measurement.date
        ,measurement.tobs
    ]
    with Session() as session:
        data = session.query(*sel
            ).filter(measurement.station == most_active
            ).filter(measurement.date >= last_date
            ).all()
    data_nest = []
    for date, tobs in data:
        data_dict = {}
        data_dict['date'] = date
        data_dict['tobs'] = tobs
        data_nest.append(data_dict)
    json_ready = json_setup(
        route_tobs
        ,data_nest
        ,desc = 'Last year of temperature data for most active station.'
    )
    return jsonify(json_ready)
```  
[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  


### Dynamic  
The following script the function shared between the two dynamic calls allowed for this API.  

```python  
def temp_byDate(start = None, end = None):
    sel = [
        func.min(measurement.tobs)
        ,func.avg(measurement.tobs)
        ,func.max(measurement.tobs)
    ]
    if start and (not end):
        with Session() as session:
            data = session.query(*sel
                ).filter(measurement.date >= start)
    elif start and end:
        with Session() as session:
            data = session.query(*sel
                ).filter(measurement.date >= start
                ).filter(measurement.date <= end)
    else:
        print('Sorry, this API call is not supported yet. ERROR 404')
        abort(404)
    data = data.first()
    data_nest = {
        'TMIN': data[0]
        ,'TAVG': data[1]
        ,'TMAX': data[2]
    }
    return data_nest
```  
[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  


#### Temperature data - Single Param  
```python  
def temp_filter_single(start):
    data_nest = temp_byDate(start)
    json_ready = json_setup(
        route_start
        ,data_nest
        ,desc = 'Basic temperature stats (min, avg, max) for a specified starting date, ends at most recent date.'
        ,params = {'start_date': start, 'end_date': None}
    )
    return jsonify(json_ready)
```  
[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)  


#### Temperature data - Dual Param  
```python  
def temp_filter_double(start, end):
    data_nest = temp_byDate(start, end)
    json_ready = json_setup(
        route_end
        ,data_nest
        ,desc = 'Basic temperature stats (min, avg, max) for a specified start and end date.'
        ,params = {'start_date': start, 'end_date': end}
    )
    return jsonify(json_ready)
```  
[:arrow_up: Return to TOC](#table-of-contents)
